[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The spiritual reawakening,
which is going on in the West--
shamanism is a
major thrust of it
because of the ease
with which the method is
learned and practiced.
And many of us in the West
are learning the ancient time
tested ways of the shaman.
>> We have an interesting
introduction for you today.
I want you to meet
an archaeologist who
is also a shaman.
And his name is
Dr. Hank Wesselman.
He's the author of two
fascinating, spellbinding
books--
"Spiritwalker" and
"Medicinemaker."
Welcome, Hank.
>> Thank you very much.
>> You're an archaeologist.
>> Actually, I would call
myself a paleoanthropologist.
I work mainly on
bones, as opposed
to the archaeologist who works
on stone tools, primarily.
>> But how does
the archaeologist
or an anthropologist
become a shaman?
What happened?
>> Well, I don't
call myself a shaman.
I wouldn't call myself
a student of shamanism.
There is a reason for this.
know Let's talk a little
bit about the shaman.
The shaman is a man
or a woman, usually
in a traditional society, who
discovers rather early in life,
as a rule, that they can induce
expanded states of awareness
in themselves.
We might use the word trance.
Some of us avoid
using the word trance
because it sounds like
we're going unconscious
when you go into trance,
when, in fact, it's
exactly the opposite.
Your consciousness expands
instead of shutting down.
In these trance
states, the shaman
is typically able to journey, to
have a classic out of the body
experience in which their
conscious awareness drifts
into an alternate reality,
which traditional people call
the spirit world.
Jung might call it the
level of archetypes.
The Kahuna mystics of Hawaii
you might call it [NON-ENGLISH],,
the knowledge of level three.
But the spirit world is a place
of information and action,
to some extent, where the shaman
can do various things on behalf
of their people.
The shaman is an
individual who is
the master of the
trance experience, who
can go into this
alternate reality,
and who typically interacts with
the entities that reside there.
>> Who are they?
>> Well, traditional
people call them spirits.
We might call them energies
or powers or awarenesses.
There are different terms for
them in different cultures.
In my own case, I discovered
I had this ability
quite by accident, in a very
spontaneous way documented
in this strange
book, "Spiritwalker."
And I find my interests being
drawn in this direction.
Now, many of your listeners
may be aware of the fact
that there is a spiritual
reawakening going on
in the West today,
in the Western world.
And shamanism is a major
thrust of this movement,
I think, because of the ease
with which these methods
are learned and practiced.
In my own personal
psychosymbology,
I have come to
conceptualize the existence
of some sort of inner doorway.
For most of our lives
it remains closed.
But for some of us, it opens,
sometimes spontaneously,
allowing us glimpses into this
land of visions and spirits
that traditional shamans
talk about and have
talked about for millennia.
Now, this gets us into
sticky areas as Westerners
because we want to
grow up in a sense
in a society in which
spirits are part
of our experienced reality.
Nevertheless, some
of us find ourselves
drawn in this direction.
And I've come to believe
that each one of us
has an inner hard drive,
very much like a computer.
And there there's a program
on this inner hard drive.
But you know what happens
when you buy a new computer
and you've got all this
stuff on your main menu--
you have no idea what
all these programs do.
What you really want to do
is get to Microsoft Word
so you can write a letter.
So you bring up Microsoft
Word, and you go to work.
And maybe years go by with all
this stuff on your hard drive
and you never bring it up.
But then, one morning at
4 o'clock in the morning,
you can't sleep.
And something comes
up on the screen.
And you think, where
did that come from?
See, I think there's a program
on our inner hard drive, which
was programmed into us through
the evolutionary process
over immense amounts of time.
I think virtually all
of us have this program.
And this program allows
us to spiritwalk,
like the traditional
tribal shaman.
But most of us don't
know we can do it.
>> That's a wonderful
word, spiritwalk.
>> Well, it very accurately
describes what I experience.
Because my spirit, soul,
complex, if you will,
literally walks out of my body.
And it's like going on
a spiritual walkabout.
>> Well, in your
book "Spiritwalker"
and in "Medicinemaker," you
do something a little bit more
than just communicating with
spirits on the other side
of the veil.
You actually time
travel into an entity
5,000 years later
than we are today.
>> This is pretty
sticky stuff, here.
One of the things I've
tried to do in these books
is explain how such a
phenomenon is even possible.
And I've been particularly
drawn to the body of knowledge,
which was possessed by the
Kahuna mystics of old Hawaii.
The Kahuna mystics had
a very interesting way
of looking at the self
and looking at reality,
and understanding how these
different levels of the self
actually function,
and how they dovetail
with the way in which
reality is put together.
It is the key to understanding
how such a phenomenon is
even possible.
For example, in this level of
reality, in the physical world,
there are certain assumptions
that we just take on
as givens, that allow
us to experience
the physical plane
the way we do--
that everything is separate
from everything else.
Right?
You're sitting over there,
I'm sitting over here.
Right?
That everything has a
beginning in an ending--
your life begins
at the beginning
and it ends when
we make transition.
And every effect has a cause.
Now, these are the
assumptions that
allow for the classical
laws of physics to operate,
and the laws of
cause and effect,
and so forth, and so on.
But this is only a level
of partial understanding
or partial awareness.
A Kahuna mystic would say
that the level of thoughts,
and emotions, and feelings,
and psychic awareness
is the second level of reality.
And in this level of
reality, everything's
connected to everything else.
It's connected through
an energetic matrix,
which they call the aka field.
And many of us, in
our moments of vision,
have glimpses of a great grid--
a great grid or a web or
a net, a glittering net.
Sometimes it's lazy
and diaphanous.
And sometimes it's very
rigid and geometric.
And this is the grid through
which everything is connected
to everything everywhere.
This is how all
psychic phenomena work.
Telepathy involves perceiving
through the connections
that you have with other
people or other places.
Now, in this level of reality,
time doesn't work the same way.
You could say that everything
that ever happened in the past
and everything that will
ever happen in the future
are all going on at once
in some sort of vast cosmic
now, connected through
this aka field.
So, in my own case, how such
a phenomenon was possible
was that I was shifting into
this second level of awareness.
I was going through
this connection,
this etheric
energetic connection,
and I was actually
making connection
with one of my
descendant selves.
>> 5,000 years in advance.
>> Yes.
Yes.
And the curious thing
is that I wasn't--
I wasn't anticipating this.
I wasn't looking for it, which
meant that somebody else was
involved in the dynamic.
And, of course, this takes
us into the third level
of reality, which traditional
people call the spirit world.
And, in my own case,
I believe that there
is a spiritual entity
who is in relationship
both with me and with
my descendant, who
is very important in bringing
the two of us together.
And this happened for a reason.
There is a hidden agenda
in these strange books.
And one of those agendas
is to give people
permission to think in new ways,
to think in new directions.
The spiritual reawakening
which is going on in the West--
shamanism is a
major thrust of it
because of the ease
with which the method is
learned and practiced.
And many of us in the West
are learning the ancient time
tested ways of the
shaman in order
to be able to do
various things, usually
on behalf of other
members of our community.
>> I think it's interesting that
if you're in any group and any
one has the nerve to come up
with a mystical experience that
they've had--
they have received
some sort of contact
from the departed one or
some kind of a contact--
it gives the other
people in the room
courage to say what
has happened to them.
>> Indeed.
>> And I think that your books
are doing this for people.
The fact that you come from
such a scientific background
and with credentials
that are so impeccable,
and someone like you has the
nerve to come out and write
about time travel and
occupying a defendant's body
5,000 years from now--
I think there's a reason for it.
>> Well, you know, I have a
growing file of correspondence,
and these fill many boxes now.
They fall into two
categories-- people praising me
for having written the book.
And, interestingly,
I have not received
a single negative
letter, not one.
>> Really?
>> I consider that
some sort of record.
But then there's the
much smaller file.
And the small file
contains letters
from people who vision like I
do, people who actually have
connected with descendant
selves and we've had glimpses
of the future, the way I have.
And, like me, most
of them were not
looking for this experience.
Like me, there was
usually something--
there was some mouse that
double clicked the program.
And in my own case, as
you're very much aware,
that mouse was joyous
marital encounters,
for lack of a better term.
>> Well, hold that thought.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> We're talking to Dr.
Hank Wesselman here,
who is the author
of "Medicinemaker"
and "Spiritwalker."
Stay with us.
We'll be right back.
[THEME MUSIC]
I'm talking to Dr.
Hank Wesselman,
with the author
of "Spiritwalker"
and "Medicinemaker."
And we're talking about his
books and about shamanism.
Hank, can anybody be a shaman?
>> Well, I think that
shamans, first of all,
tend to run in families.
There are certain
individuals who
have a genetic
predisposition towards having
visionary experience.
But, as we've just said, I
believe that this program
exists on our inner hard drive.
And I think that most of
us have it, only most of us
are unaware of it until
suddenly something
happens and the program is
brought up for the first time.
And, unfortunately in
the West, most of us
don't know what it is.
So many of us shut it down.
It happens to many
of us as children
where we start to spontaneously
vision as children.
And what we get from our
teachers and our parents are,
pay attention.
You're supposed to be here.
This isn't a time to be playing
with your imaginary friends.
Those imaginary
friends over here--
>> Well, you said you had an
imaginary friend for a long
time.
>> I did.
When I was a child,
living in New York,
I wasn't allowed to have pets in
the apartment where I grew up.
And so I had imaginary pets.
Now, I just did this
quite spontaneously.
I would go to the zoo and admire
various creatures, and then
kind of like, have
imaginary friends.
Well, one day one
of these creatures
picked me rather
than me picking it.
And it sort of followed
me home from the zoo.
This was the one that appeared
to me in a combination
animal-human form.
And I've actually got
permission to write
about this particular
entity, and I've
called it the Leopard Man
because the Leopard Man looks
very much like a Leopard Man.
Many years later this entity
reappeared in my life,
in my 40s.
And I think that this--
what traditional
shamans would call
a power animal or
a helping spirit,
was the one that brought me and
Nainoa, my esteemed descendant,
together.
It seems to be in
relationship with both of us.
There's a chapter
in the second book,
"Medicinemaker,"
about the Leopard Man,
and who the Leopard Man is.
Carl Jung would
find this chapter
absolutely extraordinary.
>> It's fierce.
>> Yes.
Yeah.
>> Very fierce.
>> Very fierce because this
is not some projected aspect
of myself.
This is the group soul, if
you will, of a large species
of cat, jungle cat.
And there's nothing human
about this particular entity.
But it's been in
relationship with humanity
for a long period of time.
Interestingly, we have
the fossils of leopards
and the fossils of humans
in the same early deposits
in Africa, which means
that we co-evolved together
in the same environment.
We were both born
in the same place.
>> Hank, you think that
a child who is having--
has imaginary friends-- is
this a sign of that child
being a visionary?
>> In a traditional society,
the elder visionaries--
the elder holy beings,
if you will, holy people,
keep an eye on the children.
And they see those
children who spontaneously
talk to individuals that
nobody else can see.
They see the signs in
children that children's have
the ability to vision.
And they begin their
training very early.
They take them on
and begin to give
them exercises to begin
to foster this ability.
Because the ability to vision
is simply a learned skill.
Once we learn that we have that
capacity, it can be learned.
And a lot of the training that
I've done in the last three
years, for example, with
Michael Harner's foundation,
has been devoted towards
sharpening this ability
and bringing it under a good
degree of conscious control
so that you--
first of all, you begin to
get these glimpses, as a rule,
as children or as adolescents
or as young adults.
You begin to get glimpses
through this visionary window.
And once you see what
you're going for,
the job of the shaman is
to deepen and stabilize
that glimpse into a
permanent visionary
capacity in which these
spirits or these entities
or this non-ordinary reality
can be seen and experienced
at will.
But beyond this,
there lies still
another level of expertise,
I guess you could say,
in which a lot of the
abilities and qualities which
are available only in the
altered state, at first,
become increasingly available
in your everyday waking
consciousness.
The experienced
meditator, for example,
who is able to induce a state
of deep calm and concentration
in themselves during
meditation practice--
they find over time
that these same states
have come and focused
concentration become
available to them in
their everyday life,
on an ongoing
moment-to-moment basis.
The same thing is true
of visionary experience.
>> It's like toning a muscle.
Yeah.
I think it reveals
something very
interesting about who we
are, and about the next stage
of human evolution.
After millions of
years of evolution
of brain and body and
nervous systems, so to speak,
I believe the next
stage of human evolution
involves the evolution
of consciousness.
This is where--
>> Happening now.
>> It's happening now.
It's happening now.
It's a very exciting time.
>> You had this amazing little
statistic that said that 25%
of people admit to having
a great interest and belief
in the mystical.
Not religion, so much, but the
mystical and the spiritual.
>> Well there was a survey that
was done by Paul Ray in San
Francisco, that was funded
by the Fetzer Institute
and the Institute
of Noetic Sciences.
This was called the
American Live Survey,
and it took place over
a number of years.
It was published
several years ago.
And it revealed that 44 million
people in the United States
are deeply interested in the
things we're talking about.
These are folks with a
very highly evolved sense
of social justice.
They're very concerned
with environmental issues.
They're very
environmentally savvy, very
concerned with the
monumental waste which
is being generated by every
level of the world capitalist
system.
But there are also people
who are mystical seekers.
They are seekers of
visionary experience.
They believe in
alternate realities.
They believe in the existence
of spirits, spirit helpers,
and spirit teachers.
They believe in the
existence of power,
what the Polynesians called
mana and the Chinese called chi.
And in yoga, it's called prana.
The [CLICKS] bushman--
remember the [CLICKS] bushmen,
from "The Gods Must Be Crazy?"
>> Yeah.
>> They call it n'um.
Virtually everyone has
a sense of this power.
These are folks who believe
in the existence of an energy
body.
And, of course, the
energy body is vital
in the healing process, knowing
how the energy body actually
functions in its relationship
with the physical body.
These are folks who
are very interested
in alternative healing.
>> These are not weirdo people.
These are professional people.
>> Highly educated people.
Many of them are in
positions of power--
social, professional, political,
economic positions of power
from which they can influence
the ideas and trends
of the greater society.
There is literally a
spiritual reawakening,
which is going on in the West.
And shamanism, amazingly,
is one of the major thrusts
of this movement.
>> Shamanism talks about going
back and picking up pieces
of your soul that you seem to
have dropped along the way.
>> You want to talk
about soul loss--
this is a very, very
interesting topic.
In looking at the whole issue of
health and illness in healing,
traditional people
have always recognized
there are three classic
causes of illness.
The first of these
is disharmony.
Disharmony is what
happens when you
lose your sense of connection
with or belonging to.
The second is fear.
It is not good for
you to walk around
with a chronic sense of
fear gnawing away at you.
Right?
It depresses your immune
system and ability to function.
But the third, and most serious
diagnosis, is soul loss.
And here's something curious--
soul loss is not
even mentioned in
our Western medical textbooks.
In our society, soul loss
might be most easily understood
in association
with trauma, where
you have a traumatic experience,
where you fall off your bicycle
and you knock your front teeth
out or you break your arm
or you have a
serious car accident
or you have a very
abusive experience
like a rape experience or
a molestation experience
or some sort of emotional
or physical abuse.
The Vietnam War vets, the
Post Combat Traumatic Stress
Syndrome is a
symptom of soul loss.
Soul loss is what happens
when the soul actually
fragments and parts of
it dissociate and leave.
And they take the memory or the
pain of a traumatic experience
with them when they leave.
Now, we might say,
where did they go?
Good question.
This falls within the realm
of the traditional shaman.
>> Who goes and gets it.
>> Traditional
Sherman's have always--
there have always
been individuals
in traditional societies
who were specialized
in being able to track
those lost soul parts,
find them, convince
them to return,
and then bring them back to
the person who has lost them.
>> Hank, can
anybody be a shaman?
>> I've come to believe that
most of us have the ability,
at least to some extent.
But about 50% of us are
real naturals at it.
The value of a training program,
such as the workshops that I do
or foundation programs
like Michael Harner does--
the value of these
training programs
is to get you in touch--
to give you the method
of getting in touch
with your spirits, your spirit
helpers, and your spirit
teachers.
These are these inner
resources of wisdom and power
that have always been there
for us ever since we were born.
And they are ultimately
linked to our destiny
and our personal life goals.
Once you're in touch with them,
they become your teachers.
And your training really
begins at that point.
>> Are they guardian angels?
Are they the guardian angels
we heard about as a child?
>> They can be.
They take that form.
>> Unbelievable.
Well, it has been a real
treat to have Dr. Hank
Wesselman with his two
books, "Spiritwalker"
and "Medicinemaker."
We bring you miracles
on this show.
Keep coming back.
[THEME MUSIC]